"Hello and welcome to another episode of No Such Thing as a Fish, a weekly podcast coming
to you from the QI offices in Covenant Garden.
My name is Dan Triber.
I'm sitting here with James Harkin, Andy Murray, and today's special guest is author
of a new book called Male Obsession, It's Mark Mason.
And once again, we have gathered around the microphones with our four favorite facts from
the last seven days and in a particular order, here we go, starting with you and Andy
Murray."
My fact is that for the Queen's coronation, people dressed up as television sets.
"This is past the giggle test, Andy."
So this is, I read this in an article by the historian Kate Williams in the Observer,
and it seems to come from a book of policemen's memoirs, or one of the first female beat
police officers wrote a book of memoirs about her experiences.
She describes it, and I think a couple of other sources say it as well.
So this is because it was such a huge thing for it to be televised, televisions were brought
in huge numbers across the country for the coronation.
I think 20 million people watched, and on average there were 17 people watching each TV
set.
And you think of TVs at the time, there were tiny, you know, screens, a few inches from
corner to corner.
So you would just go to the person in your street who had a TV and you were exactly there.
Do you know what went up in sales as well?
No.
Not massively in sales, so did massive magnifying glasses.
So they didn't magnify it so that more people could come and see.
Really?
I got that from Kate Williams's Twitter stream.
They were specially made, weren't they?
They made special rectangular ones that were made to fit on to the front of the casing
for your television, which of course in those days was a big piece of furniture.
Yeah, they made them specially.
That was fantastic.
The thing about TVs going up in numbers is definitely true.
But in 1950, there were 400,000 TV licenses in '51, there were 700,000, and in '53 there were
1,100,000.
So they did go up when the coronation was on, but actually they had been going up for quite
a long time.
So it wasn't just the coronation that caused a big increase in TV sales.
Right.
I think it's true that the one part of the ceremony that wasn't shown, because it would
be seen as too, you know, there was a big debate about whether you should be televising
something like this full stock.
Did it demean the occasion?
But they didn't show the actual coronation moment where the crowns put on her head.
I think that was actually tradition though, because I read about this where they hold the
canopy above her head, and it's a secret part.
No one knows what happens in that part.
I think that was a good idea, which is that the crown goes on to the head.
No, no, because there's more, because there's the spoon and the spoon.
You have to explain.
The Archbishop of the Canterbury Spoon is the queen.
Orking.
So is it only the Archbishop and the queen under the canopy at that point?
What?
I don't know.
Yeah.
They make a den.
All we know is what we can make out from the silhouettes of the flashlights going on on
the inside.
But there's definitely a spoon.
That's what we see.
So the ceremonial spoon comes out.
Okay.
And oil is poured.
And oil.
Anointing oil.
Anointing stuff, I think.
Yeah.
And so, and apparently it's the only surviving thing from the Middle Ages.
This is part of the tradition.
It's the only thing that's made its way through.
It unites her forehead, her breast, and her hands.
But you say in that during the coronation, the Archbishop of the Canterbury, Iled up the
queen's breast according to what I read, yeah.
What is definitely true about the Archbishop of Canterbury on that occasion, 1953, was that
he had to give the queen a push to get her started.
When she practiced, she pinned heavy curtains to her shoulders to simulate the coronation
robe.
When it came to the real thing, the coronation robes were even heavier than she expected.
And she couldn't get them because she's quite a small woman.
She was 20, whatever she was then.
She said that she whispered to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Give me a shot.
I think the exact phrase was to get me started.
That's it.
Give me a shot.
Wow.
That's very cool.
More on the Archbishop at the time, who was a very interesting guy, George Fischer.
So he was dead against it being televised for a number of reasons.
He thought it might demean the occasion and he really wanted people to join in for the
hymn if they were watching at home and stand up for the homage part of the ceremony.
And there was so much debate about this all across the country.
One MP said in the House of Commons, "Might there even be something unseemly in the chance
that a viewer could watch this solemn and significant service with a cup of tea at
his elbow?"
I learned the fact that they installed extra toilets in the app because there were so many
guests and also TV crews and everyone working on it.
They installed extra toilets at the Abbey and then did a sound check to check that if by
chance they were all flushed at the same time, the BBC's microphones wouldn't pick them
up.
Wow.
That's preparation.
Yeah.
And the choir boys were given packed lunches containing peanut butter and marmalade sandwiches
to have the opposite effect from, you know, making them go to it.
They wanted to bun them up so they wouldn't need to go to the toilet.
And they were also given really big drinks, canisters, so that once they'd had their drink, if they
needed to refill that drink's canister, it would say that it was so good.
Did they find out what the sound of 200 choir boys peeing into that canister sounded like?
Could the BBC mics pick that up, yeah?
I think this is quite well known, but I didn't know it.
Keith Richards was one of the choir boys at the choir.
I'm afraid it turns out that Keith was certainly a great choir boy, certainly sang for
the Queen, but they think a couple of years later it wasn't actually in the choir.
Which is so disappointing.
Has no one asked him?
No one can understand the answer.
I think he would have been, well, he was born, he would be a bit young.
This is where my inner nerd comes out.
He was born December the 18th, 1943, so yeah, he would have been nine.
So he would have been the right hoes then?
Yeah, he was certainly in the ballpark, but not in the alley.
That was so nerdy, Mark, coming onto our podcast, if anyone has not read Keith, which
is autobiography, it is, I was fine, in my minutes the best book, no, mine's just out.
It's the second best book.
No, you're just out.
It's the third best book of the 21st century.
We got two out this year.
And it's the fourth best book, Keith.
There's one cool bit of the coronation which didn't happen for Victoria, in fact, Victoria
was the first person that didn't happen for, so have you heard about the Queen's Champion?
No.
Okay, so in medieval coronations, and Victoria's was the first coronation that didn't happen
for, so everyone before then it happened.
The Queen's Champion, all the King's Champion, is a noble.
And for the post coronation banquet, this person would come in in full armour and throw down
his gauntlet and then challenge anyone to a fight if they said the sovereign was not fit
to rule or didn't have the right to rule.
Wow.
I think we should bring that back.
It's so good.
I reckon Brian blessed his bomb.
Yes, exactly.
There is still a Queen's Champion, so it's a hereditary position, even though they don't
do it at coronations anymore.
He's called Francis.
He started a countenance.
His full name is Francis John Fein, Marmian Dimock.
And as far as I can tell, as it's a hereditary title, he is the current Queen's Champion.
How does he look?
Like.
He just looks like a nice man.
You can't actually tell how he looks because he's wearing a full suit of armour at all
times.
What can it do?
Do we know he's the countenance office?
Like, who challenges the Queen's right to rule?
Because the one thing that did happen at the Queen's coronation dinner that hadn't happened
before was that her mother, as she became the Queen mother, wouldn't let her have too much
to drink.
Remember, you have to reign all afternoon.
She didn't want her daughter getting drunk at the lunch.
And also, of course, coronation chicken was invented for the occasion.
That's where it gets its name, especially created early.
Oh, though.
It's very similar to Jubilee Chicken, which was invented a few years earlier for the
Silver Jubilee of Joyce Afef.
How is it?
And which is basically chicken with mayonnaise and spices.
I'm pretty much exactly the same thing.
But then they, let's say, reinvented it for the coronation.
So I always call it Jubilee Chicken when I go.
Oh.
Can I have a Jubilee Chicken Panino, please?
Do you know that on that day when they dressed in, as TV sets, that's not the only thing that
they dressed as?
No.
They dressed as Mount Everest as well.
Yeah.
Well, it's been conquered the day before.
Exactly.
And the news had come through.
So they were celebrating a number of things.
And Mount Everest was a massive celebration.
So people would dress as TV sets and Mount Everest.
That's amazing.
Yeah.
What a big news day.
Everest and the coronation are the same day.
That's massive.
Yeah.
Do you know there's a conspiracy that we didn't, that Hillary didn't get to the top of Mount
Everest?
Really?
Yeah.
And it's actually really interesting, the reason why.
And the way that the news got broken to the British public was via a journalist called James
Morris, who has changed sex and is now Jan Morris, one of the most famous travel riders
alive.
Now Jan Morris got the scoop.
Was there when Hillary came down, when he said the words, "We knocked the bastard off
George" and got the scoop.
Now here was the thing.
She didn't know how to get, or here at the time, didn't know how to get the message back
without it being infiltrated and then spread around the world because he wanted the scoop.
So what he ended up sending was a coded message that he'd pre-arranged to be sent back.
And this was the message that actually went back.
The message went, "Snow conditions bad, stop.
Advanced base abandoned yesterday.
Stop.
A waiting improvement."
So the message was to say that they haven't made it.
Wow.
And people actually think that he was telling the truth there.
So what message did he send if they didn't make it then?
Good news, everyone.
That's a good point.
Yeah.
OK, time for fact number two.
And that is James.
OK, my fact this week is that the world puddle jumping championships, bands, fizzy drinks,
in case they improve participants' performance.
Talks through the science behind them.
Well, it's weird because on QI, we have said that fizzy drinks don't make children more
hyperactive.
And in the world puddle jumping championships, it's usually children.
In fact, it's always children taking part.
But they think that if you give them fizzy drinks, then they will become more excitable, more
hyperactive, and it could enable them to jump higher and make bigger splashes than other
competitors.
And they don't want to encourage people to drink fizzy drinks, because it's not good for
you.
And so they've decided to ban it.
I think that's very sweet.
Apart from the ban element of it.
It could be a placebo thing, couldn't it, if you've heard your parents have written the
news that it makes you jump better, then that could have effect.
Well, what we've said on QI, and I can't remember quite the science behind it, is that
the children actually act exactly the same, but it's the adults who then kind of fuss around
them and think, oh, they're hyperactive, they're hyperactive.
And when you get someone who's watching the events happening, who doesn't know whether
or not they've had fizzy drinks, they can't tell the difference with the children.
How do they monitor it, though?
Like, how do you test for fizzy drinking?
Is it a P sample?
I think they just ban them from the general area of the competition, so maybe you could
like, stock up on Red Bull the night before.
I was reading the Metro newspaper, covered this, and the line they used was, this is not
the first time sporting contest have been marred by doping associations.
Lance Armstrong was tripping seven.
So what they do is it's based on height of jump, enthusiasm, distance of splash and stick
ability, which is the amount of mud, which clings to each competitor, all those different things.
My favourite element of that is enthusiasm, it's being marred.
That's basically code for, as with any event where you're giving prizes to kids, the one
that looks most likely to burst into tears if you don't win, yes, the win, because you just
don't want a scene.
And it'd be good in the Olympics if the most enthusiastic competitors are living.
In the Tarder France, they'll give it, whoever is the most aggressive on the day, they'll
give a prize to even if they don't win.
Really?
Yeah.
What someone who's like, kicked other bisonists off the track, aggression in this case means
that you're making attacks earlier and trying to, trying to be of the race on what?
Yeah, right.
Okay.
The whole notion of jumping, to forget all this thing about cricket being in the Olympics,
I want the campaign to put the standing long jump back into the Olympics.
The standing long jump.
Because it used to be in until 1912, I think.
And the record is still going, even though not in the Olympics.
The record for the standing long jump was broken earlier this year, 23rd of February,
2015, the Dallas Cowboys cornerback did a standing long jump of 12 feet, two and three quarter
inches, which is the length of the snooker table from a standing.
But then the other bizarre thing about the standing long jump is that it is a condition
of entry to serve in the Brazilian police, to serve in the Brazilian police.
You have to do a stat, if you're a man, you need to be able to do a standing long jump
of 2.14 meters, if you're a woman, 1.66, there's no way I could do that.
That's great.
That's incredible.
I couldn't.
Should we do it?
And then say what our score is going to be.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
OK, we're going to do a quick cut here.
Yeah.
We do this for the morning.
Two meters.
Yeah.
That was really fun.
Right.
Anyway.
So we're still recording.
And we found out that Andy is the best at the standing long jump by about five centimeters.
Yeah.
I mean.
And we all reckon we were getting around two meters, so we don't think we can get into
the Brazilian.
But only by a few centimeters.
So if we work on it, we might be able to do it.
Did we make it into the Brazilian ladies army?
Yes, we did.
1.66.
Get in.
All right.
OK, I want to do some things about drugs and performance enhancing drugs.
So Peta Coda, who's a tennis player, he tested positive for the steroid Nandralone in
Wimbledon in 1998, but he blamed it on having eaten too much steroid fed veal.
OK.
And it turned out that if he had eaten enough veal to be tested positive, he would have had
to have eaten 40 calves a day for 20 years to have such high level.
And there was an Olympic gold medalist called Dennis Mitchell, who tested positive for high
testosterone.
And he claimed that it was because he consumed five beers the night before and had sex with
his wife four times.
That's ridiculous.
No one can have five beers.
If I was the veal guy and I was being investigated, I like to think that I would have tried to prove
that.
And when the investigators are coming out, I would have ordered a load of calves and been constantly
using a calf just all over my house and my garden full of calves.
This park where they had this puddle-tumping thing, it's called Wixsteed Park, and Wixsteeds
make playgrounds.
Yep.
Yeah.
And did you hear about the guy, Charles Wixsteed?
This is incredible.
The best thing about the fact, I think.
He invented the slide and the swing.
Two things.
That was a good morning, wasn't it?
Yeah.
He invented the slide.
Give us more details.
Well, people say that he invented the modern slide.
Now, I have found a source which disputes this and points out there are a couple of earlier
things in New York, which look a lot like slides.
So it's possible that he didn't invent the very first slide.
He definitely came up with a version of it for his park and he also invented the modern
swing, which you get in playgrounds.
And his first version, have you seen it?
No.
The top bar is almost four meters off the ground.
It looks incredibly dangerous.
Yeah.
There's photos that have been on Earth.
I don't know if you've ever seen the sort of extreme swinging.
It's kind of like that.
I think I've seen extreme swinging.
Just Google that, anyone at home.
He didn't grow up in the suburbs and not...
But what he kind of also pioneered was the idea of the playground and this park where
the puddle jumping competition was held is the park where the first ever playground was
built.
And he used pipes from World War I, Eddie, turned them into swings.
So they became the first swings and you can see the first slides as well.
They're really interesting.
The first slides were polished planks of wood with no sides, you just went down a plank
of wood.
Risking a broken leg and splinters.
Yeah, and kids, you can see them going down it and it's just very dangerous.
They were also gender segregated, one for boys and one for girls.
Yeah.
He said later on that was an old fashioned.
He realized that was an old fashioned notion and he abandoned that segregation.
And so they know where the oldest modern day swing then in the world is and it's not in
the park, it's in the backyard of Charles Wixsteed's home, which they discovered not too
long ago and it was his prototype.
And so now that we know officially the oldest swing in the world is still working, it's still
working.
But no, it is not like an iPhone that goes out there.
Okay, time for fact number three and that is Mark.
My fact is that the shuttlecocks used in professional badminton are made using real goose feathers
which are always taken from the birds left wing.
Wow.
So I kind of knew that it was taken from an animal, I thought it was duck, I think ducks can
be used in your defence.
Right.
I don't think that's the stupidest mistake anyone's ever made.
But I didn't know the left wing.
Yeah, well apparently if they use, if you get them from the left wing, it makes the shuttle
cock spin clockwise.
If you turn them from the right wing, it makes the shuttle cock spin anti-clockwise.
And they're obviously used to playing with the clockwise spin and that's why they keep
using those wings.
So if you have one which was half with feathers from the left wing and half from the right wing,
would it not spin?
It would go completely, yeah, it would be a completely haphazard.
Really?
Yeah.
So if you took the feathers from a bird's right wing and you can put them on its left wing,
so I had two left wings.
You'd be arrested.
But you're right, they do take them from a live animal because animals will regrow them.
So I don't know if they keep harvesting the same bird to get more shuttlecocks out of it.
But it does apparently cause the birding to goose incredible pain when they're taken
out.
So you then regrow.
You know when someone does, I don't know, your eyebrows?
Yeah.
That in itself is a bit like, oh, that's quite painful, imagine like at the bottom of feathers
it's almost sticks.
Well, I think it's more akin to pulling out toenails rather than hairs, isn't it?
Damn it.
I read this incredible fact which is if a bold eagle loses a feather on one of its wings,
it will shed the corresponding feather on the opposite wing to maintain balance.
Now that.
Wow.
Isn't that amazing?
You're fundamentally Christians will pick up on to show that there is a god that's just
astonishing, isn't it?
Wow.
How quickly would it do it?
I reckon just straight away.
So if you were, if you happen to be plucking a bold eagle and you took one out, you'd just
see another one go, on the other side.
That would be useful if you're like a turkey plucker or something and you'd only have to
do half the turkey.
Yeah.
Do they pluck it out their own feather or do they, can they selectively shed a single
feather?
I believe that's what I read.
Now I, I actually don't believe it myself, but that's what I read in a reputable source.
I read it.
I think that's what I read.
This is where Dan's cheekly boyish grin is causing it, easy winding us up here, but no,
that's what I read.
It's no more than four feathers from the same goose for the same shuttlecock.
I've heard that once they had a feather on it, they'd have a feather on it and they'd
have a feather on it.
I think that's what I read.
This is where Dan's cheeky boyish grin is causing it easy winding us up here, but
no, that's what I read.
It's no more than four feathers from the same goose for the same shuttlecock.
I've heard that once they had a feather on it and they'd have a feather on it and they'd
have a feather on it and they'd have a feather on it and they'd have a feather on it and they'd
have a feather on it and they'd have a feather on it.
I've heard that once they had a feather on it and they'd have a feather on it and they'd
have a feather on it and they'd have a feather on it and they'd have a feather on it and
they'd have a feather on it.
It's a feather on it and they'd have a feather on it and they'd have a feather on it and
they'd have a feather on it and they'd have a feather on it and they'd have a feather on it
and they'd have a feather on it and they'd have a feather on it and they'd have a feather on it
if we have a 2,000 year old jar of honey and a modern day jar of honey you can have the 2,000 year old one
it's such a ridiculous thing and porn is the anyone involved in making it knows it's the most unerotic thing that you're doing with a film
and famously and don't look now when Donald Sutherland and Julie Christie were supposed to have done it for real
when the love scene Donald Sutherland says if you've had a film crew around you you'll know how unerotic it is and how difficult it would be to do it
but the notion of the fluffer I found out recently apparently it's a myth that the fluffer exists at all
the fluffer does we don't know the fluffer is and I guess it's normally a woman who's paid to ready the man for his performance to get him into a physical state where he's ready to perform
and that's just a complete myth if you're a male porn performer you're expected to be ready and if you're not ready then you won't get the job
and also I love the fact that the people who clean the London Underground lines overnight when the tubes shut overnight they're called fluffers as well
so I think there is only one true job called a fluffer and it's the one that clean the tube
oh imagine your disappointment when you find out when you applied for fluffer you're down in the London Underground
I found another Egyptian book that has been sort of a mysterious book that we haven't quite cracked and decoded
and they've recently they think they've managed to decode it properly and this is Macquarie University in Australia
I think they've managed to do it and it's a thousand three hundred years old this text
and they think what it turns out to be is that it's a book of spells
some of the spells that they've translated include a spell for someone who is possessed
someone who is annoyed at you as a spell for that that a woman might conceive
and when someone has a magic on them you've got a magic on you
and I like that though this is someone who's annoyed at you
I think that's a fantastic spell
and you can just do a magic on them and they'll not be annoyed with you
exactly that's great
there's another one called the Greek Magical Papyrus
and that gives you explanations for ingredients in other magics as you might call them
so if a magic spell asks for a head of a snake it's actually a leech
and if it asks for crocodile dung it's Egyptian earth
and if it asks for lion's semen you should use human semen
but for the magical spells
so people often thought that these magic spells that they were doing had like the head of a snake in or lion's semen in
but actually they were much more normal objects
thinking back in those days who would want the job of collecting the lion's semen
you know I mean now they do it straight from the testicle I think
I know they knock it out and collect it
no I think the lions have a fluffer don't they?
isn't there a thought that the idea of them changing the words or changing
the terms is almost the copyright of its day
it was to it was the secret ingredient to Coca-Cola type things
is it yeah that's why I read with Babylonian semen
the secret ingredient of Coca-Cola
for legal reasons I think you have to say that lion's semen
I think they found that from Babylonian tunaeiform
that they thought that they were like look at all these odd ingredients
and they realized that they were coded words kind of like the Jan Morris code from Everest
so that no one could steal the proper incantation and the ingredients for us
this is just quite interesting next year playboy
no more nude women in playboy they're getting rid of
so it's all going to be sort of tasteful tasteful in quotation marks
what they think is tasteful
for you always say that you read that for the articles down don't you?
no I collect old ones because yeah Hunter S. Thompson used to write for them
Woody Allen and Grapchow Marx and yeah extraordinary comic articles in there
and now I can read it again for the articles
very exciting
okay that's it that's all of our facts
thank you so much for listening if you'd like to get in contact with any of us
about the things we've said over the course of this podcast
we can be found on Twitter I'm on @Streiberland
James @EdshapedAndy
@AndrewHunterM
Mark I'm @WaltTheLinesLDN
it's details of the book
there's anyone's the book it's M-A-I-L male obsession
yep male obsession and it's the idea is that you go around the country to all the post-codes
and you find out it's basically a book full of amazing facts
along with a journey around the UK
it's a book full of British trivia, British history, British weirdness that's been going on
and it's using post-code areas as the device yet
124 post-code areas at least one fact from each post-code area
yep awesome that's out in the shops go get it now
and if you want to listen to any of our previous shows
you can go to no such thing as a fish.com
if you want to come see any of our live shows
we've also got a page there with all of the events
there's a lot that we're doing
we'll be back again next week, see you then, goodbye
[outro music]
[BLANK_AUDIO]